Once around magnetars.
So a magnetar is a neutron star with an
exceptionally strong magnetic field. All
neutron stars tend to have magnetic
fields but magnetars are a really
extreme example and they were first
suggested back in 1992 by Duncan and
Thompson as a means to explain away the
phenomenon of soft gamma repeaters.
These are objects that were observed
with gammaray telescopes to be giving
soft gamma rays. So low energy gamma
rays repeatedly in somewhat irregular
bursts.
And they've also been suggested as the
source of another phenomenon called fast
radio bursts. FRBs first observed by
Frank Lurmer at the park's dish
observatory radio telescope picking up
these strange
somewhat artificial looking bursts of
radio noise that seem to come from very
deep space all over the cosmos.
So a word about neutron stars. These are
born in the collapse of the cause of
giant stars undergoing a supernova
explosion. The star runs out of fuel,
unable to support itself against gravity
in its core,
not able to release any more nuclear
energy. The force of gravity squeezes
the central ball of matter down and a
core turns into a solid lump of neutrons
and that is a very very compact and
dense region itself. A huge amount of
energy is released as the material falls
inwards to such a very tiny size. A lot
of gravitational potential energy is
released and a huge burst of particles
called neutrinos
along with many many gamma rays and
other energetic radiation results and
that then blows apart the star. The
overlying materials are exploded
outwards. And you see in the top right
there the image of the Crab Nebula which
is the result of a type 2 core collapse
supernova generating a neutron star. We
have an artist's impression of a neutron
star in the middle there. And then at
the bottom right, the central region of
the Crab Nebula showing the rotating
vortex and the bright central region
where the neutron star is with the
slightly angled jets of material flying
out along the spin axis. And it's those
jets that whip up the matter around the
neutron star, accelerating electrons and
generating pulses, radio waves or
pulsars as discovered using the 9 acre
array at the Mard Radio astronomy
observatory just south of Cambridge here
by Joselyn Bell working under professor
Anthony Huish.
So these balls of neutroneum matter,
these neutron stars, the enormous
pressure is responsible for the
conversion from ordinary matter made of
protons and electrons combining these
positive and negative particles into
neutral uncharged neutrons. And the
reason is that it saves a lot of space
which when there's such huge pressure
around is a good thing. It's
energetically favorable for a proton and
an electron to combine together to give
a neutral neutron and a neutrino
because it's the electrons in ordinary
matter that take up 99.9%
of the space. The protons live in the
nucleus and that is an incredibly tiny
volume
right in the center. So if you can get
rid of the electrons, then you can pack
all the matter together much more
efficiently.
So when a star like the sun dies, it
will collapse, but it stops at the white
dwarf stage where you have roughly a
solar mass worth or half a solar mass
worth of material in a volume about the
same size as the Earth. still very dense
indeed, but it can't collapse any
further because the electrons are the
limiting factor. White dwarfs could be
called electron stars in the same way
that neutron stars are held up because
you can't squeeze the neutrons together
anymore. White dwarfs are held up by the
back pressure from not being able to
crush the electrons together. the poorly
exclusion principle of quantum mechanics
keeps them apart and so they all take up
a certain amount of room. You and you
end up with a dense object but nowhere
near as dense as you would get if you
can eliminate the electrons by
converting them into neutral neutrons
and you can see the tiny size 10 to 20
kilometer size of a neutron star by
comparison.
So magnetars typically
20 km in diameter, 1.4 solar masses,
maybe a little bit more. And the density
of an atomic nucleus, so 14 orders of
magnitude more dense than the ordinary
matter in the room around me, 100
million tons for a teaspoon of this
neutroneum.
And they spin. They're rotating. And we
find that the magnetars are spinning
something about period of 1 second maybe
as long as 10 seconds which is slower
than many of the pulsars the rotating
neutron stars that can be spinning in a
fraction of a second. Uh some of them up
to a thousand times a second in the most
extreme cases. Um and values of about a
third of a second or half a second seem
very very common.
So that's interesting because it's the
spin that we think is responsible for
creating the magnetic field. The Earth's
magnetic field measured in units of
Teslas is uh a very modest 0.00005
of a Tesla. The strongest magnet we can
make in our MRI machines and our nuclear
fusion prototype reactors and so on is
around about one Tesla, maybe a little
bit more these days. Um, and that's
about the magnetic field of the sun.
Whereas a magnetar it is uh 10^ the 10
maybe even 10 to the 11 Tesla. So
enormously more powerful.
Now, this is interesting because it is
the spin of a neutron star that gives
them the magnetic field. As they
collapse down, any angular momentum they
start with is retained. Unlike an ice
skater pulling their arms in and getting
smaller, the only way to retain the
angular momentum is to spin faster. And
so, they spin up as they shrink. And the
rapid spin where you have any electric
currents flowing in the material creates
a magnetic field by the dynamo effect.
So it's not surprising that these things
have strong magnetic fields. But we
think that what happens in a magnetar is
that the
state of matter within the neutron star
is still very turbulent with a mix of
neutronized and unneutronized matter
still sorting itself out into the
densest layers being deep in the core
and the less dense material that hasn't
been converted to neutrons bubbling its
way to the top. And this creates huge
amounts of electric current flow. And
these vast currents, even though the
star is spinning slightly less fast at
this stage,
create the magnetar. And it takes
around, we think, 10,000 years for a
newly born neutron star to settle down
with the densest matter all in the
center and the lighter matter under less
pressure around the outside uh and uh to
form a nice stable rotating neutron star
or pulsar.
spinning faster because the the density
of the core has reached a maximum and so
it's packed as efficiently as it
possibly can and therefore its uh
angular momentum preservation means it
has to spin up even more. So these are
neutron stars during their baby stage uh
for the first 10,000 years as the uh
turbulence within them settles down. So
it's not surprising that we don't see
very many of these because many neutron
stars that we see are much much older
than this. Now these enormous magnetic
fields um are so strong that they create
a whole range of bizarre effects. Any
remaining atoms within the field in the
outer skin of these neutron stars get
stretched out into long thin sticks 200
times longer than they are wide. X-rays
and light photons get distorted and torn
apart into their constituent spectra and
even empty space is ripped apart
creating particle antiparticle pairs.
And it's the recombination of those
pairs of particles and antiparticles
that is responsible for creating the
gamma rays that we think we are
observing.
Just to put it into context, if you had
a magnetar sat where the moon is, all
credit cards on Earth would be wiped
out. The magnetic field at a quarter of
a million miles distance,
400,000 km, would be still so strong
that it would demagnetize all the
magnetic strips on the back of your
credit cards and disrupt pretty much all
of our electronics as well.
If you were only a thousand kilometers
away, the field would literally tear you
apart. It would tear apart the atoms
within uh the physical body. So these
things are not uh anywhere near us.
Fortunately, the nearest that we know of
is 9,000 light years away. So we're
fairly safe from them at the moment. But
they are extraordinarily dangerous
things. Here's an example. SGR, so soft
gamma repeater, and then the designation
1900 + 14 gives you the coordinates.
discovered actually using infrared
observations with the Spitzer Space
Telescope. This object was located
and it is in the constellation of
Aquilla
around about 2,000 light years away
formed after a fairly recent supernova
explosion. And you can see the infrared
image there with the dust ring around
the central bright area. And back in
1998 on the 27th of August, a burst of
gamma rays appeared to arrive and crash
into the atmosphere and ionized the top
layer of the atmosphere. Now that
happens during the day from solar
radiation. The sunward side of the
atmosphere tends to get ionized because
of all the uh high energy radiation from
the sun. But this essentially turned
[clears throat] night into day on the
night side of the earth at this point uh
illuminated by the rays from the soft
gamma repeater. And uh we're watching
this star very closely to see if it does
it again.
Here's another one. SRBs uh so soft uh
gammaray repeater. And this was
discovered in the constellation of
Sagittarius in 1979. And this is a long
way away. This is 42,000 light years
away, right through the Milky Ways core
and out the other side. It's only 25,000
light years to the core. So this is
through and in the far quadrant of the
galaxy, observable through all that
intervening material in and around the
star clouds of Sagittarius.
And we think this is a magnetar 20 km in
diameter spinning every 7 1/2 seconds
with a record magnetic field of 10 ^ 11
Tesla.
Back in 2004, 27th of December, a burst
of gamma rays again struck the Earth,
more energy in a tenth of a second than
the sun releases in 150,000 years.
That's uh incredible. And again,
ionizing the whole of the upper
atmosphere with the enormous amount of
radiation. So, our magnetic field was
not able to stop the gamma rays. Of
course, they're neutral, so they came
straight through it. But we are
protected by the upper layers of our
atmosphere from the worst effects of
this sort of thing reaching the ground.
Um, and it takes a while for the
atmosphere to recover from a burst like
this. But this wasn't the supernova.
This was just a star quake on the
surface of the magnetar. So a bubble of
material from deep inside finally uh
erupting like a volcano onto the surface
of the magnetar and creating a
disturbance that was estimated to be 30
on the richter scale. Uh remember the
rter scale of earthquakes and a seven or
eight is about the uh truly enormous
earthquake on earth and each uh increase
of the number is a factor of 10. It's
one of those logarithmic scales. So a
recctor scale 30 eruption on the surface
of this magnetic neutron star.
Now this occurred in the middle of a
cluster part of the Westeroot 31 region
which is a an H2 region a star forming
region of ionized hydrogen and the
uh central part of that is a very rich
star cluster containing a lot of very
powerful stars. Slightly difficult to
observe because this is 42,000 light
years away on the other side of the
galaxy. remember uh but we can see
through all of that well enough to
detect a couple of carbonrich wolf ray
stars a couple of blue hyper giants and
a luminous blue variable LBV1806-20
which is one of the brightest and most
massive stars in the galaxy. So a very
very violent environment indeed with all
these huge stars there
and a 2024 paper suggests that the
periodicity in the gamma and x-ray
bursts
are triggered by a planet. So this
incredibly magnetic object with
absolutely violent explosions going on
on the surface seems to have a rocky
super earth of around 10 to 20 Earth
masses in an orbit taking just over a
year 398 days going around it. Now that
orbit is at a distance of just 1.18
astronomical units. So 18% larger in its
semi- major axis than our Earth, but in
an incredibly elliptical orbit. So
utterly bizarre. You certainly wouldn't
want to be uh trying to ek out an
existence on a a planet orbiting such a
magnetar only that far away.
And then deep in the center of our
galaxy, we have another soft gamma ray
repeater magnetar J1745-2900.
This is just a third of a lightyear from
Sagittarius A star, the super massive
black hole in the center of the Milky
Way and in fact is in orbit around it.
We can see in the image there the inset
region right in the center with SAG A
star the super massive black hole and
its accretion disc and then the position
of the magnetar with it flaring up
between 2008 and 2013 as it underwent an
enormous uh outburst one of these soft
gammaray events.
So uh it's also a radio pulsar and has a
period of 3.76 seconds. So this is uh
spinning up. It's not yet spinning as
fast as an ordinary pulsar. And that
tells us this is a very young and still
growing neutron star with the turbulence
and reorganization in the center as it
differentiates and the dense material
sinks to the very core.
And then another object for you, this
time detected by gravity waves. The LIGO
and Virgo gravity wave observatories
combined to to make a detection of the
chirp of a pair of neutron stars that
spiraled in and merged with each other.
You can see the blue and red data there
from LIGO and Virgo creating that rising
pitch spike in the central part of the
uh diagram. And the artist's impression
of a pair of neutron stars orbiting each
other giving off gravity waves as the
orbit shrinks and the energy is
dissipated by those gravity waves
carrying it away. Uh so they fall in
towards each other and eventually merge
and a huge gammaray burst was detected
with the exact same origin. So in time
with the merger as well. And all of the
characteristics of this event point to
the creation of a brand new, heavier,
hyper massive magnetar,
but a very short-lived object because it
promptly collapsed under its own
enormous mass to a black hole. There's
an upper bound for the size, the mass of
a neutron star, the Tolman Oppenheimer
Vulov limit of about 2.2 two solar
masses. And so if you start with a pair
of 1.5 solar mass neutron stars and you
bump them together, you'll dissipate a
lot of energy and mass in the resulting
explosion. uh but you may create an
object that's over the Tolman Openheimr
Vulov limit and not even the strength of
the neutron star material is then able
to prevent further collapse and the uh
limit can result in it collapsing
straight down to a black hole at that
point. So we think that's probably what
happened here. So very very brief
existence for the magnetar before it
collapsed.
And that's it. Thank you very much for
listening to this one.